hugo/content/docs/cluster/getting-started-kubernetes.md, before:

# Kubernetes deployment

This is the continuation of the [Getting Started With Grains tutorial](getting-started-net.md). For now, the tutorial showed how to run multiple members locally using Consul.
The same setup might be also suitable for some deployment cases, but since modern applications are more often deployed in Kubernetes, it is better to select dedicated provider for it.

[Kubernetes provider](kubernetes-provider-net.md) is another implementation of `IClusterProvider` interface, the same as [Consul provider](cluster/consul-net.md). For more information you can check [Cluster providers section](cluster-providers-net.md).

## MANDATORY READING!!

[Stop using CPU limits](https://home.robusta.dev/blog/stop-using-cpu-limits)

The essential configuration is CPU Requests combined with No CPU Limits. Deviating from this configuration results in CPU throttling, leading to gossip timeouts and associated issues.

This is not an issue specific to Proto.Actor; rather, it is a problem inherent to real-time systems within Kubernetes. Real-time systems cannot tolerate intermittent CPU pauses on nodes, as this unpredictably renders them unresponsive for undefined durations.

## Changes in the application

First thing that needs to be done is to reference `Proto.Cluster.Kubernetes` package where this implementation is provided.
The next step is to replace Consul provider with Kubernetes provider in `ActorSystemConfiguration.cs`.

```csharp

...

var clusterConfig = ClusterConfig
    .Setup(
        clusterName: "ProtoClusterTutorial",
        clusterProvider: new KubernetesProvider(),
        identityLookup: new PartitionIdentityLookup()
    )

```

It is also needed to change how remote configuration is prepared. We bind to all interfaces and use `ProtoActor:AdvertisedHost` host address passed in the configuration.

``` csharp
var remoteConfig = GrpcNetRemoteConfig
    .BindToAllInterfaces(advertisedHost: configuration["ProtoActor:AdvertisedHost"])
    .WithProtoMessages(MessagesReflection.Descriptor);       
```

To have `configuration` variable in `AddActorSystem` extension it is needed to change its signature.

```csharp
public static void AddActorSystem(this IServiceCollection serviceCollection, IConfiguration configuration)
{
    ...
}
```

And usage in `ProtoClusterTutorial` `Program.cs`.

```csharp
builder.Services.AddActorSystem(builder.Configuration);
```

The same in the `SmartBulbSimulatorApp`

```csharp
services.AddActorSystem(hostContext.Configuration);
```

At this step both applications should be ready to run in Kubernetes, but first we need to create container images.

## Create docker images

To continue next steps it is needed to have container registry where the images will be pushed. In our tutorial we will use Azure Container Registry. You can find instructions how to create it [here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/tutorial-kubernetes-prepare-acr?tabs=azure-cli).

Add Dockerfile into `ProtoClusterTutorial` directory:

```Dockerfile

# Stage 1 - Build
FROM mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/sdk:6.0 AS builder

WORKDIR /app/src

# Restore
COPY *.csproj .

RUN dotnet restore -r linux-x64

# Build
COPY . .

RUN dotnet publish -c Release -o /app/publish -r linux-x64 --no-self-contained --no-restore

# Stage 2 - Publish
FROM mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspnet:6.0
WORKDIR /app

RUN addgroup --system --gid 101 app \
    && adduser --system --ingroup app --uid 101 app


COPY --from=builder --chown=app:app /app/publish .

USER app
    
ENTRYPOINT ["./ProtoClusterTutorial"]

```

After this you should be able to build docker image for the `ProtoClusterTutorial` app with tag:

```sh

docker build . -t YOUR_ACR_ADDRESS/proto-cluster-tutorial:1.0.0

```

You need to add Dockerfile in the `SmartBulbSimulatorApp` directory too:

```Dockerfile

# Stage 1 - Build
FROM mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/sdk:6.0 AS builder

WORKDIR /app/src

# Restore
COPY /ProtoClusterTutorial/*.csproj ./ProtoClusterTutorial/
COPY /SmartBulbSimulatorApp/*.csproj ./SmartBulbSimulatorApp/


RUN dotnet restore ./SmartBulbSimulatorApp/SmartBulbSimulatorApp.csproj -r linux-x64

# Build
COPY . .

RUN dotnet publish ./SmartBulbSimulatorApp/SmartBulbSimulatorApp.csproj -c Release -o /app/publish -r linux-x64 --no-self-contained --no-restore

# Stage 2 - Publish
FROM mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspnet:6.0
WORKDIR /app

RUN addgroup --system --gid 101 app \
    && adduser --system --ingroup app --uid 101 app


COPY --from=builder --chown=app:app /app/publish .

USER app
 
ENTRYPOINT ["./SmartBulbSimulatorApp"]

```

`SmartBulbSimulatorApp` relies on `ProtoClusterTutorial` sources so you need to run it from the main directory and pass Dockerfile as argument.

```sh

 docker build -f SmartBulbSimulatorApp/Dockerfile . -t YOUR_ACR_ADDRESS/smart-bulb-simulator:1.0.0

```

So now we created images for both applications and they should be visible on the images list:

```sh
docker images
```

Tip: If you encounter strange errors during building images then remove `obj` and `bin` directories. You can also consider adding `.dockerignore` file to skip them.

Both images should be pushed to our container registry:

```sh

docker push YOUR_ACR_ADDRESS/proto-cluster-tutorial:1.0.0

...

docker push YOUR_ACR_ADDRESS/smart-bulb-simulator:1.0.0

```

Now both images are stored in the container registry and we can start application deployment.

## Deployment to Kubernetes cluster

To continue next steps it is needed to have Kubernetes cluster running. In our tutorial we will use Azure Kubernetes Service. You can find instructions how to create it [here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/tutorial-kubernetes-deploy-cluster?tabs=azure-cli).

To simplify the deployment to Kubernetes we will use [Helm](https://helm.sh/). Ensure that you have installed it locally and `helm` command is available. You can check how to do it [here](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/quickstart/)

Now we are going to prepare Helm chart that will help us with deployment.
To not create everything by hand you can download `chart-tutorial` [folder](https://github.com/asynkron/protoactor-grains-tutorial/tree/5351544702d4905948b45db97202dfb8290a2d25/chart-tutorial) from tutorial's repository on Github.

This chart contains definitions of following resources:

- deployment - the most important part is setting `ProtoActor__AdvertisedHost` variable based on pod's IP

``` yml
env:
    - name: ProtoActor__AdvertisedHost
    valueFrom:
      fieldRef:
        fieldPath: status.podIP

```

- service - to make each member reachable by another members

- role - permissions needed for [Kubernetes cluster provider](kubernetes-provider-net.md)

- service account - [identity in Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-service-account/) that will be used by pod (Kubernetes provider)

- role binding - connection between role and service account

To continue with deployment you should open `values.yaml` and replace `member.image.repository` with your image. The same with `member.image.tag`. Key `member.replicaCount` determines the number of running replicas. By default it it 2.

After this, you need to open terminal in a chart's folder parent directory. Then you need to run `helm install` to deploy your image.

```sh
helm install proto-cluster-tutorial chart-tutorial
```

Where `proto-cluster-tutorial` is the name of the release and `chart-tutorial` is the name of a folder where the chart is located.

After this you should be able to see in the command line information that deployment is succeeded.

```sh
helm install proto-cluster-tutorial chart
```

You can also check that there are two running pods:

```sh
$ kubectl get pods

NAME                                     READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
proto-cluster-tutorial-886c9b657-5hgxh   1/1     Running   0          63m
proto-cluster-tutorial-886c9b657-vj8nj   1/1     Running   0          63m
```

If we will look closer to the created pods, we can see labels that were added by Kubernetes provider [here](https://github.com/asynkron/protoactor-dotnet/blob/dev/src/Proto.Cluster.Kubernetes/KubernetesProvider.cs#L114).

![pod-labels](images/pod-labels.png)

At this point these pods do nothing. Now it is needed to deploy simulator. We can reuse the same chart because simulator uses cluster client to send data to proto.actor cluster and requires similar permissions.
To do this we will call helm install as before but we will override values saved in `values.yaml` file. So first let's copy `values.yaml` file and rename it to `simulator-values.yaml`.

In the file we will change repository and tag to align with simulator image pushed to container registry. We also change `replicaCount` to 1 because we would like to have only single replica of the simulator.
Then we open again terminal in chart's parent directory and deploy simulator. We are adding `--values` parameter override `values.yaml` stored in chart's folder.

```sh
helm install simulator chart-tutorial --values .\simulator-values.yaml
```

We can also see that the pod has been deployed and we can see one more pod:

```sh
$ kubectl get pods

NAME                                     READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
proto-cluster-tutorial-886c9b657-5hgxh   1/1     Running   0          98m
proto-cluster-tutorial-886c9b657-vj8nj   1/1     Running   0          97m
simulator-68d4c5c4df-zgxv2               1/1     Running   0          6m22s
```

We can look into pods logs to see that both pods started processing data. 

```sh
kubectl logs proto-cluster-tutorial-886c9b657-5hgxh
```

We can do the same experiment as we did for Consul provider and scale down number of replicas to 1 to see that actors are recreated on the node that is still alive.

Commit message:

docs: add Go grains getting started guide

hugo/content/docs/cluster/getting-started-kubernetes.md, after:

# Kubernetes deployment

This is the continuation of the [Getting Started With Grains tutorial for .NET](getting-started-net.md). If you're using Go, start with the [Getting Started With Grains / Virtual Actors (Go)](getting-started-go.md) guide. For now, the tutorial showed how to run multiple members locally using Consul.
The same setup might be also suitable for some deployment cases, but since modern applications are more often deployed in Kubernetes, it is better to select dedicated provider for it.

[Kubernetes provider](kubernetes-provider-net.md) is another implementation of `IClusterProvider` interface, the same as [Consul provider](cluster/consul-net.md). For more information you can check [Cluster providers section](cluster-providers-net.md).

## MANDATORY READING!!

[Stop using CPU limits](https://home.robusta.dev/blog/stop-using-cpu-limits)

The essential configuration is CPU Requests combined with No CPU Limits. Deviating from this configuration results in CPU throttling, leading to gossip timeouts and associated issues.

This is not an issue specific to Proto.Actor; rather, it is a problem inherent to real-time systems within Kubernetes. Real-time systems cannot tolerate intermittent CPU pauses on nodes, as this unpredictably renders them unresponsive for undefined durations.

## Changes in the application

First thing that needs to be done is to reference `Proto.Cluster.Kubernetes` package where this implementation is provided.
The next step is to replace Consul provider with Kubernetes provider in `ActorSystemConfiguration.cs`.

```csharp

...

var clusterConfig = ClusterConfig
    .Setup(
        clusterName: "ProtoClusterTutorial",
        clusterProvider: new KubernetesProvider(),
        identityLookup: new PartitionIdentityLookup()
    )

```

It is also needed to change how remote configuration is prepared. We bind to all interfaces and use `ProtoActor:AdvertisedHost` host address passed in the configuration.

``` csharp
var remoteConfig = GrpcNetRemoteConfig
    .BindToAllInterfaces(advertisedHost: configuration["ProtoActor:AdvertisedHost"])
    .WithProtoMessages(MessagesReflection.Descriptor);       
```

To have `configuration` variable in `AddActorSystem` extension it is needed to change its signature.

```csharp
public static void AddActorSystem(this IServiceCollection serviceCollection, IConfiguration configuration)
{
    ...
}
```

And usage in `ProtoClusterTutorial` `Program.cs`.

```csharp
builder.Services.AddActorSystem(builder.Configuration);
```

The same in the `SmartBulbSimulatorApp`

```csharp
services.AddActorSystem(hostContext.Configuration);
```

At this step both applications should be ready to run in Kubernetes, but first we need to create container images.

## Create docker images

To continue next steps it is needed to have container registry where the images will be pushed. In our tutorial we will use Azure Container Registry. You can find instructions how to create it [here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/tutorial-kubernetes-prepare-acr?tabs=azure-cli).

Add Dockerfile into `ProtoClusterTutorial` directory:

```Dockerfile

# Stage 1 - Build
FROM mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/sdk:6.0 AS builder

WORKDIR /app/src

# Restore
COPY *.csproj .

RUN dotnet restore -r linux-x64

# Build
COPY . .

RUN dotnet publish -c Release -o /app/publish -r linux-x64 --no-self-contained --no-restore

# Stage 2 - Publish
FROM mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspnet:6.0
WORKDIR /app

RUN addgroup --system --gid 101 app \
    && adduser --system --ingroup app --uid 101 app


COPY --from=builder --chown=app:app /app/publish .

USER app
    
ENTRYPOINT ["./ProtoClusterTutorial"]

```

After this you should be able to build docker image for the `ProtoClusterTutorial` app with tag:

```sh

docker build . -t YOUR_ACR_ADDRESS/proto-cluster-tutorial:1.0.0

```

You need to add Dockerfile in the `SmartBulbSimulatorApp` directory too:

```Dockerfile

# Stage 1 - Build
FROM mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/sdk:6.0 AS builder

WORKDIR /app/src

# Restore
COPY /ProtoClusterTutorial/*.csproj ./ProtoClusterTutorial/
COPY /SmartBulbSimulatorApp/*.csproj ./SmartBulbSimulatorApp/


RUN dotnet restore ./SmartBulbSimulatorApp/SmartBulbSimulatorApp.csproj -r linux-x64

# Build
COPY . .

RUN dotnet publish ./SmartBulbSimulatorApp/SmartBulbSimulatorApp.csproj -c Release -o /app/publish -r linux-x64 --no-self-contained --no-restore

# Stage 2 - Publish
FROM mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspnet:6.0
WORKDIR /app

RUN addgroup --system --gid 101 app \
    && adduser --system --ingroup app --uid 101 app


COPY --from=builder --chown=app:app /app/publish .

USER app
 
ENTRYPOINT ["./SmartBulbSimulatorApp"]

```

`SmartBulbSimulatorApp` relies on `ProtoClusterTutorial` sources so you need to run it from the main directory and pass Dockerfile as argument.

```sh

 docker build -f SmartBulbSimulatorApp/Dockerfile . -t YOUR_ACR_ADDRESS/smart-bulb-simulator:1.0.0

```

So now we created images for both applications and they should be visible on the images list:

```sh
docker images
```

Tip: If you encounter strange errors during building images then remove `obj` and `bin` directories. You can also consider adding `.dockerignore` file to skip them.

Both images should be pushed to our container registry:

```sh

docker push YOUR_ACR_ADDRESS/proto-cluster-tutorial:1.0.0

...

docker push YOUR_ACR_ADDRESS/smart-bulb-simulator:1.0.0

```

Now both images are stored in the container registry and we can start application deployment.

## Deployment to Kubernetes cluster

To continue next steps it is needed to have Kubernetes cluster running. In our tutorial we will use Azure Kubernetes Service. You can find instructions how to create it [here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/tutorial-kubernetes-deploy-cluster?tabs=azure-cli).

To simplify the deployment to Kubernetes we will use [Helm](https://helm.sh/). Ensure that you have installed it locally and `helm` command is available. You can check how to do it [here](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/quickstart/)

Now we are going to prepare Helm chart that will help us with deployment.
To not create everything by hand you can download `chart-tutorial` [folder](https://github.com/asynkron/protoactor-grains-tutorial/tree/5351544702d4905948b45db97202dfb8290a2d25/chart-tutorial) from tutorial's repository on Github.

This chart contains definitions of following resources:

- deployment - the most important part is setting `ProtoActor__AdvertisedHost` variable based on pod's IP

``` yml
env:
    - name: ProtoActor__AdvertisedHost
    valueFrom:
      fieldRef:
        fieldPath: status.podIP

```

- service - to make each member reachable by another members

- role - permissions needed for [Kubernetes cluster provider](kubernetes-provider-net.md)

- service account - [identity in Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-service-account/) that will be used by pod (Kubernetes provider)

- role binding - connection between role and service account

To continue with deployment you should open `values.yaml` and replace `member.image.repository` with your image. The same with `member.image.tag`. Key `member.replicaCount` determines the number of running replicas. By default it it 2.

After this, you need to open terminal in a chart's folder parent directory. Then you need to run `helm install` to deploy your image.

```sh
helm install proto-cluster-tutorial chart-tutorial
```

Where `proto-cluster-tutorial` is the name of the release and `chart-tutorial` is the name of a folder where the chart is located.

After this you should be able to see in the command line information that deployment is succeeded.

```sh
helm install proto-cluster-tutorial chart
```

You can also check that there are two running pods:

```sh
$ kubectl get pods

NAME                                     READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
proto-cluster-tutorial-886c9b657-5hgxh   1/1     Running   0          63m
proto-cluster-tutorial-886c9b657-vj8nj   1/1     Running   0          63m
```

If we will look closer to the created pods, we can see labels that were added by Kubernetes provider [here](https://github.com/asynkron/protoactor-dotnet/blob/dev/src/Proto.Cluster.Kubernetes/KubernetesProvider.cs#L114).

![pod-labels](images/pod-labels.png)

At this point these pods do nothing. Now it is needed to deploy simulator. We can reuse the same chart because simulator uses cluster client to send data to proto.actor cluster and requires similar permissions.
To do this we will call helm install as before but we will override values saved in `values.yaml` file. So first let's copy `values.yaml` file and rename it to `simulator-values.yaml`.

In the file we will change repository and tag to align with simulator image pushed to container registry. We also change `replicaCount` to 1 because we would like to have only single replica of the simulator.
Then we open again terminal in chart's parent directory and deploy simulator. We are adding `--values` parameter override `values.yaml` stored in chart's folder.

```sh
helm install simulator chart-tutorial --values .\simulator-values.yaml
```

We can also see that the pod has been deployed and we can see one more pod:

```sh
$ kubectl get pods

NAME                                     READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
proto-cluster-tutorial-886c9b657-5hgxh   1/1     Running   0          98m
proto-cluster-tutorial-886c9b657-vj8nj   1/1     Running   0          97m
simulator-68d4c5c4df-zgxv2               1/1     Running   0          6m22s
```

We can look into pods logs to see that both pods started processing data. 

```sh
kubectl logs proto-cluster-tutorial-886c9b657-5hgxh
```

We can do the same experiment as we did for Consul provider and scale down number of replicas to 1 to see that actors are recreated on the node that is still alive.
